Builtin path, v2 (#8958)
fish-shell/fish-shell: doc_src/cmds/path.rst

.. _cmd-path:

path - manipulate and check paths
=================================

Synopsis
--------

::

    path basename GENERAL_OPTIONS [PATH...]
    path dirname GENERAL_OPTIONS  [PATH...]
    path extension GENERAL_OPTIONS [PATH...]
    path filter GENERAL_OPTIONS [(-v | --invert)] \
        [-d] [-f] [-l] [-r] [-w] [-x] \
        [(-t | --type) TYPE] [(-p | --perm) PERMISSION] [PATH...]
    path is GENERAL_OPTIONS [(-v | --invert)] [(-t | --type) TYPE] \
        [-d] [-f] [-l] [-r] [-w] [-x] \

>         [(-p | --perm) PERMISSION] [PATH...]

Reviewer: no need for backslashes and "..." should have a leading space.  Also `[(-v | --invert)]` should be `[-v | --invert]` and options should probably be aligned in the source like in string.rst.

    path normalize GENERAL_OPTIONS [PATH...]
    path resolve GENERAL_OPTIONS [PATH...]
    path change-extension GENERAL_OPTIONS EXTENSION [PATH...]
    path sort GENERAL_OPTIONS [(-v | --invert)] \
        [-u | --unique] [--key=basename|dirname|path] [([PATH...]

>     GENERAL_OPTIONS := [(-z | --null-in)] [(-Z | --null-out)] [(-q | --quiet)]

Reviewer: Are we planning to add null switches to other commands as well? I don't see `path` and `string` being all that different in this regard.

Author: I believe we should add them to string as well, yes.

The main reason this is in path first is because it's *necessary* for path to be complete - NUL is the only byte you can use to separate paths unambiguously, and so it exists in a lot of commands (`find -print0`). Whereas string already passes through NULs from stdin, and has `string split0` that you can use to *work* with NUL-delimited strings by passing them as arguments.

Unfortunately `string` won't be able to use the PATH_MAX trick, because strings are arbitrary.

    # The "//" is squashed, but /bin isn't resolved even if your system links it to /usr/bin.
    /bin/bash
    
    >_ path normalize ./my/subdirs/../sub2
    my/sub2

    >_ path normalize -- -/foo
    ./-/foo

"resolve" subcommand
--------------------

::

    path resolve [(-z | --null-in)] [(-Z | --null-out)] [(-q | --quiet)] [PATH...]

``path resolve`` returns the normalized, physical and absolute versions of all paths. That means it resolves symlinks and does what ``path normalize`` does: it squashes duplicate "/" (except for two leading "//"), collapses "../" with earlier components and removes "." components. Then it turns that path into the absolute path starting from the filesystem root "/".

It is similar to ``realpath``, as it creates the "real", canonical version of the path. However, for paths that can't be resolved, e.g. if they don't exist or form a symlink loop, it will resolve as far as it can and normalize the rest.

It returns 0 if any normalization or resolution was done, i.e. any given path wasn't in canonical form.

Examples
^^^^^^^^

::

   >_ path resolve /bin//sh
   # The "//" is squashed, and /bin is resolved if your system links it to /usr/bin.

>    # sh here is bash (on an Archlinux system)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+   # sh here is bash (on an Arch Linux system)
```

If the extension is empty, any previous extension is stripped, along with the ".". This is, of course, the inverse of ``path extension``.

One leading dot on the extension is ignored, so ".mp3" and "mp3" are treated the same.

It returns 0 if it was given any paths.

Examples
^^^^^^^^

::

   >_ path change-extension mp4 ./foo.wmv
   ./foo.mp4

   >_ path change-extension .mp4 ./foo.wmv
   ./foo.mp4

   >_ path change-extension '' ../banana
   ../banana
   # but status 1, because there was no extension.

   >_ path change-extension '' ~/.config
   /home/alfa/.config
   # status 1

   >_ path change-extension '' ~/.config.d
   /home/alfa/.config
   # status 0

   >_ path change-extension '' ~/.config.
   /home/alfa/.config
   # status 0
   
"sort" subcommand
-----------------------------

::

    path sort [(-z | --null-in)] [(-Z | --null-out)] \
        [(-q | --quiet)] [(-v | --invert)] \
        [--what=basename|dirname|path] [([PATH...]

``path sort`` returns the given paths in sorted order. They are sorted in the same order as globs - alphabetically, but with runs of numerical digits compared numerically.

> With ``--invert`` or ``-v`` the sort is reversed.

Reviewer 2: I suggest `--reverse` / `-r` instead of `--invert`, to match sort(1).
